Root Canals: No More Pain!      

Root canals have historically gotten a bad rap, but they can be the saving grace for your extreme tooth pain, and the tooth itself! When many people think of root canal therapy, they fear the dentist or endodontist causing intense pain. However, that is not the case! In fact, root canals help to eliminate your tooth pain and are not a painful procedure.  

 

Why do I need a root canal? 
Root canals are needed to remove bacteria and infected tissue from a tooth's infected root. Performing root canal therapy prevents reinfection and can help save the natural tooth. If you are experiencing any of the following symptoms, a root canal may be the answer: 

Severe pain while chewing or biting 

General trauma to the tooth, such as a chipped or cracked tooth  

Lingering sensitivity to hot or cold, even after the sensation has been removed 

Aching or constant throbbing pain in the mouth 

Swollen or tender gums 

Deep decay or darkening of the gums  

 

What happens during a root canal?  
Today’s root canals are very similar to a routine dental filling and are not painful. Often the pain from your tooth is worse than the actual procedure. The procedure, given proper anesthesia, has no pain at all! After treatment, you will be pain-free and on your way to recovery. 

Your dentist or endodontist will begin by numbing the area. They then remove the inflamed or infected nerve of the tooth. The area is then filled and sealed to prevent repeat infection. Afterward, you will likely need a crown placed on the treated tooth to restore full form and function.  

 

Run don’t walk! 
Don’t let your fear of the dentist or root canals keep you from becoming pain-free. The longer you wait, the more pain you will experience and can sometimes result in losing the tooth if not treated. This also risks greater and worsening infection. At Dental Associates, our dentists and endodontists are well-trained and want to help you become pain-free. If you are experiencing tooth pain, schedule your appointment today. 

 

Still anxious? Ask your dentist or endodontist what can be done to help alleviate your dental anxiety.  